Jailyn Loor
Clayton Meyer
Quant Bio Term Project 2025 Check in #1
Addressing Prior Feedback:
During our group project session, we encountered difficulties downloading the large sequencing datasets associated with our experiments of interest. In class, we had learned to use the wget command to retrieve data, but this approach proved inefficient for handling very large files. One of our instructors suggested using a for loop to streamline the process. Following this advice, we discovered Entrez Direct, a command-line tool for querying NCBI databases. Using this tool, we extracted the metadata for our selected experiments and saved it to a text file. We then used the run IDs from this file to download the corresponding raw sequence data from the NCBI SRA database. Finally, we implemented a for loop with the fasterq-dump command introduced earlier in the semester to pull and manage all the sequencing files.

New Progress
Since the proposal, we have been focusing on troubleshooting the Pathofact 1.0 pipeline in order to predict bacterial virulence (Goal 1) and have begun to write the code to analyze our three datasets. Initially, we were unsure on how to use the Pathofact pipeline to compare multiple samples, however we have since learned how to modify the Pathofact environment file “Pathofact.yaml” to allow the pipeline to compare all the samples we want to analyze at once.

Project Organization
We have decided to divide different datasets between our two group members, with Clayton analyzing C. difficile data and Jailyn analyzing psoriasis microbiome data within Pathofact 1.0 and then later in Pathofact 2.0. This division should alleviate individual computers’ limitations in storage space and processing power while allowing both group members to understand the functional differences between Pathofact 1 and 2. Once we have completed working with these datasets, we will work together to run Parkinson’s microbiome data through the Pathofact pipeline as the last of the datasets included in our Goals 1+2. Time permitting, we will then analyze the pathogenic E. coli stool sample data (Goal 3). We anticipate that once we have finished troubleshooting the pipeline and learn to generate volcano plots with the initial datasets, application to different datasets should progress relatively quickly. Additionally, we have established a set schedule for weekday meetings and made it a priority to attend office hours for assistance when needed. This plan will help us stay on track with our milestones through the end of the semester. 

Current Struggles

-C. difficile microbiome data are in FASTA format, while psoriasis patient microbiome data are in FASTQ format. The Pathofact pipeline requires samples to be in FASTA format, so we need to convert psoriasis data to FASTA using a program like IMP but we had trouble getting permissions to use the program. Ideas on other methods to convert file format would be welcome. As of right now, Jailyn did some research and noticed a popular program for sequence assembly is MEGAHIT (https://www.metagenomics.wiki/tools/assembly/megahit) and is trying to get that up and running on her data set. 

-Creating the Pathofact environment has been troublesome due to its reliance on an outdated Python version (3.6). Pins in the Pathofact.yaml environment file are outdated versions that need to be adjusted/unpinned to avoid persistent errors. Until we are able to adapt the Pathofact pipeline to work with a more current Python version, we are unable to analyze our datasets within the Pathofact environment, so any ideas on how to proceed would be greatly appreciated.

-Neither the paper itself nor the Pathofact git repository indicated how to generate the volcano plots from the Pathofact paper we want to replicate. As a result, we have decided that we plan to use R programming for visualization purposes, as our coursework and weekly labs have made us feel more confident in our ability to approach these plots. Therefore, we anticipate that the graphs will not look the exact same from the figures aesthetically, but hope to have a similar figure after overcoming some of these obstacles. 

